>> Hello.
I'm Georgia
Shakti-Hill and I want
to welcome you today to "Living
in Balance on Shakti-Hill."
This is our healing series and,
oh, what fascinating topics.
Aromatherapy is what we
will be discussing today.
And we'll be talking about it.
Oh, it might be modern as
an alternative medicine,
but it is ancient in its use.
Come join us today "Living
in Balance on Shakti-Hill."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Candace Welsh, is
the "Oil Lady."
And aromatherapy
is what she does.
Welcome.
>> Thank you, Georgia.
It's nice to be here.
>> It is wonderful to have you.
We've been talking so much about
essential oils and aromatherapy
and the medicinal qualities.
And now, we're going to get to
share this with our audience.
And I'm really
excited about that.
You are labeled the "Oil
Lady" and you're proud of it.
>> Yes, I am.
It's where I belong.
>> Yes.
But your background is diverse.
And you have a personal
story that brought you--
almost a miracle
and self-healing.
And part of that
was aromatherapy.
You needed a journey to
find out how could Candace
be well again.
>> Yes.
And to find out where
I'm supposed to be.
All that goes along
with it, I think.
>> Yeah.
>> And so tell us a little
bit about your story
and the wonders of aromatherapy.
>> Well, I was executive vice
president and sales manager
of a large real estate company.
And through years of stress
and different things,
I just ended up in a lot of
physical pain-- you know,
frozen shoulder,
headaches, entrapped nerve.
And it got to the point where
trying to work through the pain
wasn't working anymore.
And I was out searching
for everything.
I had always been very
attuned to physical exercise,
and nutrition, and rest.
And I felt like with those three
things we should be healthy,
but I had some other
lessons to learn.
And the pain got to
the point physically
where I needed to stop working.
And I was out
searching even while I
was working with doctors and a
lot of other things just trying
to get out of pain and
get my energy back.
But I needed to stop working
to give myself time to do that.
And while I was out searching,
one of the things I came across
was aromatherapy.
And it was a true aromatherapy
massage from someone
from England.
And this was about 10 years ago.
And the minute I
touch the oils, it
brought this incredible
sense of comfort to me.
And I went, oh, what is this?
I have to learn.
>> I love it and it works.
So it got me through
all the tension.
And I ended up
having two operations
during this time period.
And without them, I'm just
not too sure whether--
I feel like they saved my life.
They calmed the physical
tissue of your body because
of their anti-inflammatory
properties.
They calm your emotions because
of the nose-brain connection.
So they work on us through
all the different properties
that they have.
And so I went off studying,
just learning for myself.
I set up my laboratory.
And I went to
England and learned
and started journaling
and learning.
And then it just
kept like going out,
classes around my kitchen table.
And now we're a real company.
>> Yes.
And it's really exciting
because you have become--
from the successful
executive who
had the stress-related
illnesses to the healer.
And that is your role.
And you're really a
part of this whole idea
of we can take responsibility,
and we can be empowered,
and we can heal ourselves.
>> And it's often our
difficulties that get us
to that place.
You know, without
the difficulties
I had I never would have
found essential oils.
And I really feel like I was
born to do what I'm doing now.
And I never would have
been out searching
if I hadn't been in pain.
So pain is a great motivator.
And I always tell people,
if they think they're out
of balance, just go with it.
Because if they'll go with
it and search with it,
it will truly be a blessing.
It will take you where
you're trying to go.
And without that difficulty, or
discomfort, or whatever it is,
you wouldn't get force to
go out and find your river.
And once you get in your
river, it just takes you.
>> And you know it.
And it's like then
you really resonate.
So for you, it is the oils.
And it's then you were willing
to just take the time just
to find out everything that
you needed to know about it.
You went to school to be a
licensed massage therapist
so that could be a
part of the healing.
And then as you learned,
everything just sort of
fell into place and
it made sense to you?
>> Yes.
I don't ever feel like
there was ever a struggle.
I don't feel like anything
I've ever determined
was going to be something I
was going to set up and do.
It just kept happening.
>> Well, we have a chart
about the reason it works
scientifically.
And you said the
olfactory sense,
it's an idea of touch and smell.
And tell us a little about that.
>> There's two main
reasons essential oils work
as medicine.
And of course, they were
our origin of medicine.
And they were the
origins of perfume,
because the liquid
happens to smell.
But if the liquid
didn't smell, it still
has antibacterial,
antiviral, some
have antifungal properties.
So they are liquid
medicine for the skin
and for the physical tissue.
Then the idea that it
smells, and it smells--
I don't think
there's a stronger,
purer smell than true
high-grade essential oils.
And that smell is what works
on through the nose-brain.
So essential oils
work on us mainly
because of the
nose-brain connection
and because of skin absorption.
So whenever we're rubbing them
on the body with a base oil,
they will go into the skin.
But what's so
fascinating, and continues
to fascinate me
and always will--
it's just miracle after
miracle is what happens
with the power of smell.
Whenever we smell something,
just to pick up and smell,
the smell molecules are
coming out of whatever
it is we're smelling.
Hopefully, it's
wonderful essential oils.
And the molecules pick
up and go up the nose
to the olfactory neurons which
are the nerve cells of smell
system, the olfactory system.
The molecules go up
to our olfactory bulb,
which is up between the eyes.
And then there's a track that
goes directly to the brain.
And the nerve cells take
these smell molecules
right into the brain.
So of the five senses--
this conference I
was at in England,
they were saying our nose
is simply a passage way.
The true organ of
smell is the brain,
because there's a direct
track to the brain.
And it's the part
of the brain that's
the limbic system, which is
our most primitive brain,
the emotional brain.
So when it goes to the
limbic system, that's
why it triggers this
thought or it triggers
this emotion that we
don't get to decide
what we want to think
when we smell something,
it just comes in.
>> Because it is
almost instantaneous,
it's just a matter of a second
or two from the time we smell
it until we respond?
>> Yes.
Deepak Chopra said
a while ago that it
changes our body chemistry
in less than a hundredth
of a second.
Because when it shoots
to the limbic system,
it hits the hypothalamus,
which is the brain's brain.
And that's connected to the
pituitary gland, the master
gland of the endocrine system,
master gland of the body.
So that changes the brain's
juices or the neuropeptides
and the neurochemicals that
are coming out and affecting
the tissue.
>> So it is
scientifically based.
But it is also ancient.
The history of aromatherapy
is as old as man.
>> Oh, it's beautiful.
As long as there were
plants on the earth,
there was essential oils,
because they come out
of some part of a
plant or a tree.
Like the lavender comes out
of the flowers of lavender.
Peppermint comes
out of the leaves.
Sandalwood comes
out of the wood.
So they are this
encapsulated liquid
that's very intense in a plant.
They're too strong even to
travel around in the plant.
They're held in these
little oil sacs.
And I've seen them under
a microscope at my Purdue
University course.
And just to see
the oils in there,
and then the steam
bursts the oils
out when they're
steam distilled.
And then we get that liquid
concentrated at the end.
So it's like nature
giving us the liquid
that's in her to be a
part of medicine for us.
>> We also mentioned
rubbing them into the skin.
And you like the jojoba oil?
>> I do like the jojoba.
I worked with about eight or
10 different vegetable and nut
oils, which we would
classify all as base oils.
The essential oils are the
pure essences-- lavender,
peppermint, tea tree,
eucalyptus, orange.
To apply them to
the skin, we need
to mix them with a base oil
because they're so strong.
And some of them could burn
the skin if put on directly.
And when I discovered jojoba,
I stopped using the vegetable
and nut oils.
They will go rancid eventually.
Jojoba is actually a liquid wax.
It's not an oil.
And it's cold pressed from the
brown bean of a desert plant.
And some of the best
jojoba in the world
comes from our country in
Arizona and California.
>> And do you know?
One thing that I have talked
with massage therapists about,
and doctors, too, is the idea
that we forget that the skin is
the largest organ of the
body and that you do directly
absorb through the skin.
And it can be a
wonderful healing
to use the oils in that way.
>> Yes, yes.
And jojoba has a
natural affinity
with the sebum in our skin.
And it's loaded
with antioxidants.
So it's really food for the
skin and it's very silky
when you put it on your skin.
It goes right in.
It's a perfect carrier
for essential oils.
And it will not go rancid.
And of course, essential
oils can last for lifetimes.
>> And aromatherapy
is worldwide.
And you were honored
by being asked
to be a part of a
book that was created,
an anthology of aromatherapy,
and you wrote a chapter.
>> Yes.
It was created by the
National Association
of Holistic Aromatherapists.
And there are about 30 of
us from around the world
that each contributed a chapter.
So it's a very unique
book, because you
get this broad overview of how
all these different people that
have worked with oils for years
happened to see their focus.
>> And your focus is
the medicinal qualities
of the oils?
>> Yes.
My focus is taking something
that's very complex
and making it very simple.
In my laboratory, I have
about 60 to 70 oils,
but I teach mainly
five because I
see them as such wonderful
medicine, physical medicine
and emotional medicine,
that people should have
those five in their household
with their toothbrush,
and their aspirin, and whatever
other things they have there
and use them on a daily basis.
>> Well, we're going
to talk about that
because you've created, then,
what your favorite five are
in a Medicine Tin.
And we're going to go
through each of those five
essential oils and what effect
they can have on the body
and how they can have that
effect almost immediately.
You also told me that
you have a wonderful mist
that one can use.
And I've used the
one for the airplane.
And you have a little
package that goes with that.
And also one other thing
which I can't wait to use
is the natural insect
repellent, too.
So you really are a little
scientist in there creating,
are you not?
>> Well, and it was all
things I created for me.
The medicine started in
a little plastic baggie
with a paper towel for me.
And then it went through
all these evolutions
to where it is now.
And the airplane regimen
started out for me
because I was getting
sore throats and cold.
So as things come up,
now I get to the point
when something's coming
up new with me, I go,
well, I guess I need to
learn about this now.
>> And it will serve others.
>> So then I get it
there and create.
>> OK.
We're going to take a break.
And when we come back,
let's go through the oils.
And we'll talk about how they
serve us well, as you do, too.
So if you'll stay tuned, we'll
be right back with Candace.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Candace Welsh is the Oil Lady.
And the subject is aromatherapy.
And the purpose is
self-healing and how
you can use the
essential oils and be
self-empowered by doing that.
Yes.
Now, what you've created
is the Medicine Tin.
And we're going to talk
about those five oils
that you say all
of us could use.
And it would be like the basics.
This would be
wonderful for starters.
And we should have
them all in our home.
>> Yes.
One of the things I
find about aromatherapy
is it's very
confusing to people,
because there are
hundreds of oils.
There are well over
400 essential oils.
>> Oh.
>> And when people
start to hear about it,
and they want to
experiment with it,
the tendency is to go out and
buy a lot of oils and then kind
of not know what
to do with them.
And I like to take it
and keep it very simple.
The five oils that I
think are the basic five
that help us on a daily basis
are what I've put together
and put it in a way
where people don't need
me to make up blends for them.
The Medicine Tine of five oils
with the base oil of jojoba
and the lavender mist is
designed so that people
can take care of themselves.
They can open the tin up and put
the oils out on their dresser,
put the lid out on the
dresser with the oils in it.
And then they make
up in their hand what
they need when they need it.
>> And I told you I carry
lavender with me all the time.
And tell us about the qualities
of lavender, what that is for,
how that helps us.
>> Of all the essential oils,
lavender is the most universal,
the most versatile, and the
most acceptable to the largest
number of people.
It's extremely balancing to
the central nervous system.
And the nickname I give
it is the balancer.
Each oil has its
own little nickname.
And lavender is the balancer.
Just by smelling
out of the bottle,
we can balance the
central nervous system
and help balance the
rhythms of the body almost
instantaneously.
If we're very nervous or if
we've been through something
very traumatic,
like a car accident,
just amazing things will
happen to get the lavender
right to your nose and
just breathe it in.
So as an inhalant, it will help
get right to the limbic system
and help balance the
central nervous system.
>> You've also created--
in addition to lavender
being a part of this--
you have Lavender Penny
and the Lavender Pillows,
is that right?
>> A little Lavender Penny
Bear and a Lavender Pillow.
And both the bear and the
pillow have a little bottle
of pure, high-grade
lavender with them
so that if someone just needs
that comfort of lavender,
it can be tapped on the
pillow or tapped on the bear,
and kept on their bed, or
traveled with, or as a gift
to someone who's in the
hospital, or not feeling well,
or been through some grieving.
It's just a tremendous comfort.
>> Yeah.
OK.
So lavender is the balancer.
And we're always talking
about staying in balance,
living in balance.
And so that's one
way that we can
is keep our lavender with us.
Now, another thing that I
use, my first medicinal oil
that I use is tea tree.
And I always have that with me.
In fact, I told you I couldn't
find mind this morning,
I thought, oh, no.
But tea tree oil is
wonderful for what?
>> Specifically for red
ant bites, mosquito bites,
bee stings, anything that
can form a little infection,
a little nodule.
Most of the oils we
don't use straight
on our skin at any time.
The exception to that is
lavender and tea tree.
Lavender is fantastic
for burns and cuts
because it's anti-inflammative
and antibacterial.
Tea tree has those
same properties.
In addition to that, it's
antiviral and antifungal.
So if we get bitten by a
bee or any kind of insect,
and we've got that sting
and that possible site
of infection, that's when we'll
get a drop on it straight.
It's just wonderful.
>> And I did mention chiggers,
which some people might be
aware of in different
parts of the country.
When we go to our
North Carolina place,
that's major to have your
tea tree oil to combat it.
And that's where you
also said that you
did create that
mist of citronella
and some other things, too.
But we're moving
through the tea tree.
So tea tree-- antibacterial,
antiviral, antifungal.
>> Yes.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah, very powerful.
So used as medicine,
one drop straight
would be for a site, a spot.
But if we have a cold, it's
also internal infections,
then we'd pour the jojoba
in the palm of our hand,
add one drop of tea
tree, and then we've
made our palm blend
to apply to the nose,
rub the hands together,
go around the ears,
go to the chest and help any
kind of respiratory infection
that we have, colds and flu.
>> And then peppermint.
>> Mm.
>> Yeah.
Peppermint, and that is
also one that I've been told
has many wonderful
uses, even energizing.
They say you can
use it in your car
if you're driving long distances
and it will invigorate you
as you drive.
>> Yes.
Peppermint, I think is a
little hidden jewel of an oil
because it's such a common
sense to us and taste to us
that we don't often think
of it in a pure state
as an essential oil as medicine.
But it has a wonderful ability
to revitalize the mind,
clear the mind,
clear the sinuses,
and wonderful for digestion.
I call it the number
one digestion oil.
>> That's true, oh.
>> For belly rubs.
>> OK.
>> Wonderful for digestion.
>> All right.
So if you have an upset
stomach or something, even just
the inhaling of it would
be as effective as taking
some peppermint or
something internally.
>> Yes.
The inhaling out of the
bottle is always good.
And then, especially, if
you want to clear the mind
and you're driving, or
you're sluggish, or you lose
focus on something
you're working on--
sometimes when I'm
writing and I lose
focus, I pick up the peppermint,
just take those deep breaths.
But if you want to put it
on your body like a belly
rub for a stomach ache, then
you pour the jojoba in your palm
and you add one
drop of peppermint.
And then again, you've made your
healing salve and just enough
for what you need at the moment.
>> Rub the tub.
>> Yeah.
And apply some to the
nose first to make
the nose-brain connection
and then go to the belly.
>> Interesting.
OK.
Eucalyptus, tell us about that.
It's wonderful to have
eucalyptus around you
in your home, but in an
oil, how does one use it?
For what reasons?
>> Yeah.
Eucalyptus would be
the oil of respiration,
wonderful for any
breathing, opening up
the sinuses, any
congestion in the head
and the respiratory track.
And again, just inhaling
out of the bottle,
we don't ever want
to underestimate
the power of inhaling.
And then if we want to apply
it to the nose, or the ears,
the neck, the
chest, just like we
used to do with
Vicks VapoRub, we
apply the jojoba in our hand.
And we just need to pour
enough jojoba to fill up
the well of your hand.
And then you add one drop.
And the oil and the oil
comes in the European bottles
with the droppers in them.
So only one drop will come out.
And then, again, you've
made up your healing salve
to do the chest rub with,
put on your T-shirt.
Put it on the
soles of your feet.
Put your socks on and go to
bed and just let the eucalyptus
work on your system.
>> And see again, then, we have
to remember that the skin is
that organ through
which we can absorb.
OK.
So you use both the inhaling
and then also on the body.
And then orange,
wonderful orange.
>> Wonderful orange, the
natural tranquilizer.
Very sweet, warming,
nurturing, very soothing,
again, it's antibacterial.
So all the oils are reinforcing
a healthy immune system.
They all have
antibacterial properties.
But orange is
wonderful for stress.
It would be a second or addition
to stress oil with lavender,
wonderful used
together or by itself,
and a great children's oil, too.
>> Tell us a little bit about
the airplane and lavender
and what you do now, because
that's one of the ways that I
do use the lavender, because
we do have to ward off
the bacteria and things and
viruses that we could get as we
travel.
And that happens
so much to people.
What do you do?
>> I have a little
airplane regimen,
because I was tired of getting
sore throats and colds on every
trip.
So I have the
lavender mist which
I make up in my laboratory.
And it has the
properties of lavender
to soothe and
soothe the emotions
as well as keep the
skin antiseptic.
And I mist with the lavender
throughout the flight
whenever I want to.
And it just clears
all that heavy, slow
feeling we get from
the airplane air that's
just constantly
being turned over
and losing oxygen all the time.
>> I told you I mist my husband
whether he likes it or not when
we travel by plane.
But also you told me
before that in Europe, they
have used lavender in
hospitals for years.
So this--
>> To clean the air.
>> Yes.
To clean the air again.
Yes.
>> So after I mist
several times,
then I'm keeping my lavender
and my peppermint oils with me.
And I'll breathe
the lavender now
and then to clear
the nasal passage.
And I'll breathe the
peppermint at the same time.
And if people happen
to get nervous flying,
the lavender is wonderful
soothing to the nerves.
And if they get travel
sickness, the peppermint's
wonderful for that to settle
than the nauseated feeling.
But aside from that,
just to breathe
would be to help keep
the nasal passage clear
and keep your breathing
healthy so you're not
picking up the germs.
>> This is absolutely wonderful.
Thank you so much.
I'm so appreciative.
So we have the Medicine Tin
that you have put together,
which is our own little
self-healing technique.
You have been a part of a
"World of Aromatherapy."
You have a tape that
explains how we use this.
So the Oil Lady,
this is wonderful.
>> Well, it gives people the
ability to help themselves
and then they help their
family and their friends.
And that's the
way to get it out.
>> And also as a licensed
massage therapist,
you include this as
part of the regimen.
And so what a gift you
are in sharing that.
>> Thank you.
And I appreciate your
sharing the wisdom
and the light with us
in this healing series.
So if you will stay
tuned, we will give you
information how you can be
in touch with Candace Welsh
and then we'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
"Living in Balance
on Shakti-Hill"
is about self-healing.
Aromatherapy is a
wonderful technique.
And it is so easy.
Just start with the
simple, with the lavender,
with the eucalyptus, the
peppermint, the orange,
the tea tree oil.
Just try and see
how you, too, can
learn to live in balance
using aromatherapy.
Until next time, may you be
well, happy, and peaceful.
Bye-bye.
[MUSIC PLAYING]